Temples

Dwarakadhisa Temple
Considered a holy city, Dwarka is well known for its temples and as a pilgrimage centre for Hindus. The Dwarakadhisa Temple, also called Jagat Mandir, located in the heart of Dwarka, is a Vaishnava temple.[2] It was built by Raja Jagat Singh Rathore, hence it is called Jagat Mandir.[43] The temple, facing west, is at an elevation of 12.19 metres (40.0 ft) above mean sea-level. It is conjectured that this temple location is 2,500 years old and is where Krishna built his city and a temple. However, the existing temple is dated to the 16th century.[2][44] It is a five-storied edifice built over 72 pillars (a sandstone temple with 60 pillars is also mentioned[22]). The temple spire rises to a height of 78 metres (256 ft), and a very large flag with symbols of the sun and moon is hoisted on it.[44][2] The temple layout consists of a garbhagriha (Nijamandira or Harigraha) and an antarala (an antechamber).[45] The main deity deified in the sanctum is Dwarkadeesh, which is known as the Trivikrama form of Vishnu and is depicted with four arms.[44]

The Dwarakadhisa Temple is also the location of Dvaraka Pitha, also called Sharada Matha/Peeth and "western peeth"),[15][note 1] one of the four peeths (Sanskrit: "religious center") established by Adi Shankaracharya.


Rukmini Devi Temple
Gomti Ghat consists of steps leading to the Gomti River, which is also a holy place for pilgrims to take a dip in the river, before visiting Dwarakadish temple. The ghat has a number of small shrines dedicated to the Samudra (God of the Sea), Saraswati and Lakshmi.[2] Other notable temples in the ghat area include the Samudra Narayana (Sangam Narayana) temple, which is at the confluence of the Gomti River with the sea, the Chakra Narayana temple where there is a stone with an imprint of a chakra as a manifestation of Vishnu, and the Gomati temple, which has an idol of the river goddess Gomati that is said to have been brought to earth by the sage Vasishta.[44]

The Rukmini Devi Temple, dedicated to Rukmini, Krishna's chief queen, is located 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) away from Dwarka. The temple is said to be 2,500 years old, but in its present form it is estimated to belong to the 12th century. It is a richly carved temple decorated with sculptures of gods and goddesses on the exterior with the sanctum housing the main image of Rukmini. Carved naratharas (human figures) and carved gajatharas (elephants) are depicted in panels at the base of the tower.[48]

Letitia Elizabeth Landon's poetical illustration  The Sacred Shrines of Dwarka., to an engraving of William Purser's painting shown above (painting of the late 1820s), says little of the temples themselves but does advocate and praise religious tolerance. It was published in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1837.[49]

Nagesvara Jyotirlinga
Ancient Shiva temple, Nagesvara Jyortirlinga, one of the 12 Jyotirlingas and only 16 km from Dwarkadhish Temple.

Lighthouse and lake

Lighthouse at the Dwarka Point
There is a lighthouse at the Dwarka Point on the Dwarka peninsula, which provides a panoramic view of the town. It is a fixed light situated 70 feet (21 m) above the sea level, and the light is visible over a distance of 10 miles (16 km). The lighthouse tower is 40 feet (12 m) in height and is 117 yards (107 m) away from the high water level in the sea.[50][51] The radio beacon provided on this lighthouse tower is powered by a solar photovoltaic module.[52]

There is a lake or tank called Gopi Talab in the western part of Dwarka.

A similar lake known for Gopi Chandan, meaning "sandal paste from Gopi", is situated in Bet Dwarka; this mud is found in the bed of the lake. This fragrant mud is applied as a sanctity symbol by devout Hindus on their forehead.[53]

Bet Dwarka

Bet Dwarka coast
Main article: Bet Dwarka
Bet Dwarka, an island in the Arabian sea off the coast of Dwarka. Considered the original residence of Krishna, Bet Dwarka was the old port during the ancient times of Krishna before the Okha port was developed in Dwarka. The temple built here is credited to the religious Guru Vallabhacharya of the "Pushtimarg Sampradaya". Rice is the traditional offering here to the deity as it is believed that Sudama offered rice to his childhood friend Krishna. There are also smaller shrines on Bet Dwarka which are dedicated to Shiva, Vishnu, Hanuman and Devi.[54] According to a legend, Vishnu killed the demon Shankhasura on this island. There are temples of Vishnu in the incarnation of matsya, or fish. Other shrines here are of Rukmini, Trivikrama, Devaki, Radha, Lakshmi, Satyabhama, Jambavati, Lakshmi Narayan, and many other gods.[50] Sudarshan Setu, a bridge connecting the land to Bet Dwarka, facilitates access to the island.[55]

Hanuman Dandi temple is another notable temple located in Bet Dwarka, 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) away from Dwarkadhish Temple, Bet Dwarka. The temple is deified with many images of Hanuman and his son Makardhwaja. The legend associated with the birth of a son to Hanuman, who is considered celibate, is that the sweat of Hanuman was consumed by a crocodile which then gave birth to a son named Makardhwaja.[54] The Jethwa Rajput clan of Kshatriyas claim their descent from Makardhwaja.


Nageshwar Mandir
Nageshvara Jyotirlinga Mandir is a temple dedicated to Shiva, and one of the twelve Jyotirlingas (meaning “pillars of light") is deified here in a subterranean cell.[56]

Shivrajpur Beach
Main article: Shivrajpur beach
Shivrajpur Beach is 14.5 km (approx. 8.8 miles)[57] from Dwarka Railway Station and is among eight Indian beaches to get the prestigious Blue Flag beach certification.[58][59][60]

Culture and sports
Culture

An American Guru distributing love of God among Indians and others in Dwarka
Janmashtami is the main festival that is celebrated during the months of August and September[61] with great fervor and piety as it is believed to be the abode of Lord Krishna in prehistoric times. The festival is marked by several night long celebrations to mark the birth of Krishna. Bhajans and sermons are part of the festivities. At midnight there is reenactment of Krishna's childhood in the form of Garba and Raas dances. On this occasion, the local boys create a pyramid and a young boy in the costume of Krishna climbs up this pyramid to strike a pot holding butter, an act which Krishna had mischievously performed with the gopis.[2] This is also known as "Dahi Handi" or Utlotsavam.

Sharda Peeth Vidya Sabha is an educational society sponsored by the Sharda Peeth, which runs an arts college in Dwarka. The town is also home to the N.D.H. High School and P.V.M Girls' High School.[62]

Transportation
Dwarka is well-connected by road, rail and air to cities across the country.

Train
Dwarka railway station is a fairly busy railway junction station of Western Railways and is served by numerous regional and long-distance trains. It connects the city with major cities of state and the country. A weekly train service connects Guwahati, Rameswaram, Puri, Tuticorin, Dehradun and Kolkata. A daily trains connects the city to major cities in Gujarat such as Ahmedabad, Bhavnagar, Jamnagar, Junagadh, Rajkot, Surat, Vadodara and Veraval.

Air
Nearest Airport is Jamnagar Airport at 131 km which has a daily direct flight to Mumbai and thrice-in-a-week flights to Hyderabad and Bengaluru.

Road
217 kilometres (135 mi) away from Rajkot, 235 km from Somnath and 378 kilometres (235 mi) from Ahmedabad.